Title: We build the wrong things
Date: 2015-04-01
Category: Life
Lang: en

Yesterday, at 3 a.m. in the morning -Vietnam time- I called up the German and French embassies in Hanoi, desperately trying to wake up someone from their staff and get them to help me. Along with them, I also called half a dozen other organizations whose emergency numbers I could find on the Internet. I spoke with a short-tempered and (supposedly) red-eyed German bureaucrat who was angry at me for waking her up, and with her -rather incompetent- French counterpart who just wasted my time and was not even interested in what I told him. I spelled out the words d-o-c-t-o-r and a-m-b-u-l-a-n-c-e to Vietnamese people that replied to me in broken and unintelligible English. I threatened people, yelled at them and cried on the phone while going through a nightmare that could have originated directly from one of Franz Kafka's books. One that wouldn't end until six hours later, after having talked with more than twelve people in three different languages. What had happened?

A friend of mine, one I hold dearer than almost anyone in this world, was in danger. At 3 am in the morning, she was stuck at a remote train station in Hanoi, alone, frightened to death, and paralyzed by a medically induced psychosis. I had already suspected that something might be wrong with her when she wouldn't return any of the messages that I had sent her the day before. She was on a trip through Vietnam and Cambodia with two friends of her, and she had texted me a day earlier, telling me that she was feeling drowsy and that she would therefore stop the Malaria medication that she took as a prophylactic measure. At that time I was already worried, the more so since the friends traveling with her told me that she had started behaving strangely the day before, not wanting to talk to anyone and acting weird. They didn't think that it would be anything serious though and left her on her own the next morning to take a plane back to China, where she was supposed to meet them after taking a train to go there herself (I don't know why she didn't want to take the plane).

She never made it to the train. Somehow, she managed to check out from the hostel in the morning and take a taxi to the station, but the large crowds there must have amplified her anxiety so much that she suddenly felt unable to move on, so she just crouched in a corner in the waiting room, spending the whole day and evening there. When I came home from my work in Germany in the evening and she still hadn't replied to any of my messages, I grew really worried. So, as a last resort I tried calling her French cell phone, hoping she would have it with her and that it would work in Vietnam.

She picked up. I immediately asked her if everything was OK and she replied that yes and that she had just missed her train, so I relaxed a bit. When I continued talking to her it became clear though that something was very wrong: She thought I was not real and that she was dreaming and was surrounded by ghosts, and that she couldn't go anywhere because she was really scared. I suddenly realized that she was in a dangerous situation and not able to help herself out of it, and a feeling of despair and fear overcame me. I knew I had to get her to a hospital as fast as possible, but how? I tried to convince her to ask for help and yell out "Does somebody speak English here? I need help!" and "Est-ce-que quelqu'un parle francais ici? J'ai besoin d'aide". No one reacted. This was hardly surprising, after all, it was 3 a.m. and there were only Vietnamese people at the station at the time, and probably not the most helpful or friendly kind of people, for that matter. Next thing, I tried to make her find a policeman or train official and get them to call an ambulance, but again to no avail.  I thought about asking her to leave the station and take a taxi to a hospital, but she was too scared to go anywhere and I wasn't sure what she would do in her hallucinatory state, and I feared she might run in front of a car or step down on the railway tracks, so I just asked her to stay where she was and answer the phone when I would call her again. After hanging up, I frantically searched for ANY emergency number that I could call in Vietnam, but I didn't come through to any of them with my German phone (and Skype doesn't seem to allow emergency calls either). The next thing I tried was to call up the French and German embassies in Hanoi, waking up their standby staff. They would not help me either though, and the German official even lost all interest in helping me after she learned that my friend was not a German but a French citizen (I just cannot put the contempt I feel towards people like that into words).

Finally, after spending four hours on the phone and calling half a dozen people -including my friend's mother in France as well as her father, who was also at a different city in Vietnam at the time and able to speak Vietnamese- and spending three hours intermittently talking to her on the phone to calm her down and keep her stable, we were finally able to get someone to take her to a hospital. Some credit for this goes to Google Translate, which allowed me to translate a simple description of the situation into Vietnamese and sent that to her phone via SMS, so that she could show it to people at the station. My friend is now under medical supervision and is already feeling better, so luckily this story has a happy ending. Personally though, I feel like having grown several years older in one single night (I hope this saying translates into English, but you get the idea).

I'm still a bit under shock as I'm writing this, but I already thought it, and honestly the whole thing makes me really angry. Not because some people I talked to were unwilling or unable to help me (although some were), but more so because it simply should not have been so damn hard to solve this problem and get my friend to safety. After all, she had fallen sick in the center of a city of seven million, so how difficult could it possibly be to get adequate help to her in a short amount of time? Actually very difficult, it seems. I keep wondering if I was just too stupid to make the right calls or explain the whole thing to people, but I think I was rather sober and careful when making these calls. What worries me more is what could have happened if she had lost her phone, or if somebody had attacked her while she was sitting there alone in the middle of the night, or if she had injured herself in that state of mind. Would it have ended so well?

As a scientist I believe in technology, and I believe that we can build amazing things that make our lives easier and more fulfilled. This night though, it also became evident to me that we might not always make the best use of the technologies we have available, and that we might actually be building the wrong things after all.

I mean, how can it be that I live in a world where I can play a game of World of Warcraft online with three million other players, while it seems impossible to get four people on the phone that have the right skills to help someone who is in a situation of acute danger. In my case, one person from Hanoi speaking Vietnamese and English and with a basic training in medicine could have saved hours of worrying and uncertainty. Also, how can it be that my friend carried a state-of-the-art Android phone with her which able to play 3D games and stream videos in HD, but cannot place an emergency call to the nearest hospital while transmitting her coordinates using the GPS? But "there's an app for that!" you say. Well guess what, that app isn't any good if it's installed only on 0.1 % of all phones and needs to be found first and downloaded from the app store (try to explain that to someone who's undergoing a shock or a psychotic episode).

So why are these things not considered when we develop technology (of if they are, only as an after thought)? And why do we use most of our technology to just make highly elaborate toys? Probably because most VCs and many founders think that these things are important to work on, or that there's a lot of money to be made with them. What can we do about this? I think we should at least think twice about the products that we invest our time and money in.